Friday, September 27, 2024

v0.0.44 Report from Matt Traum

Hi Tim,

Got the synth! This is very exciting for me!

Initial observations. You have done a phenomenal job on this! I am astounded how much you have done with this platform. I will just list things here as I encounter them to document them...

=============================================

1. Pop turning on/off. It would be nice to sort this out.
When laying out the new board, I should be able to fix this--no problem.

2. Legato is making a fast transient at the note change when played with my NuEVI. Not giving a smooth legato transition point like EWI4000s built in synth. Interestingly, this only happens with my NuEVI which is currently running Firmware 1.5b4. The legato is smooth using the EWI5000 and EWI SOLO. FYI, Johan and I were working on delaying the Note OFF message slightly because Apple Logic has a problem with recreating the note overlap correctly in legato playing. I think he added a parameter to the NuEVI firmware to adjust this added time. I don't recall. In Logic, with pretty much every wind controller, I always need to add a few ticks to the duration of MIDI notes to recreate the proper overlap in legato transitions so that a mono mode patch will actually play legato upon playback. This was a fix that we came up with. Maybe this extra overlap time is affecting your code?

Just checked and v1.6.1 of the NuEVI is fine and does not have this legato issue.

3. The Synth does not want to power up my EWI USB. I wonder why. Must be current draw is too high?
Hmm...seems to power mine ok.  Though, I haven't done a current draw analysis of the host port. I'll do that and ensure that it can source enough current for the EWI USB (there should be a spec somewhere about how much current it needs).

4. Love the stereo reverb. This is such a step up from the EWI4000s mono reverb. 
Yeah, it sounds nice. I still have to fix the quantization noise in the "tails" (noticeable on short bursts if your environment is quite enough).

5. On the Delay effect, can we make it stereo and add a parameter to adjust the delay for Left and Right independently? This will allow for some very nice widening of the sound.
I was planning on doing all three effects in stereo at some point (chorus, delay, reverb). I have a couple of technical challenges first.

6. Also, adding the option to Cross Delay would make the sound huge. So the Feedback from one side feeds the opposite side.  
This should be easy once the delays are stereo.

7. Is the Chorus effect in stereo? 
No not yet, but on the list.

8. The default breath curve seems hard to blow to get to the full value. Can you match the default better to the EWI4000s breath response? Ideally we would want a global "Breath Curve" parameter (and also a global Breath Gain parameter) like on the VL70-m so the user can set this in one global spot (and not have to adjust every single patch individually) when changing from one wind controller to another. Note there is of course a big difference between a Curve and Gain setting.

I normally have my NuEVI and NuRAD br curves set to s1. When I set it to linear, I can see what you mean. Also, when I used the WARBL2, i did notice that it required a LOT of breath to get to max.  
There are a lot of breath curves, gains and adjustments to get working together between a controller and synth, so getting the defaults at least playable initially is important, so the 1st time user isn't baffled by it all. But adding some more global controls would be appropriate here.  

9. The portamento time really needs to update continuously- not just at the beginning of the note. So for example, if you are in the middle of a very slow glide, lifting up on the glide sensor should change the speed immediately.
Yeah, I saw your podcast with Alistair (i think it was), where you talked about that. I haven't had a chance to add that feature yet. 
On the list.

10. Patch 005 sounds like the pitch blip maybe is too slow? (Not matching what I did in the EWI4000s bank.)
Yeah, you'll notice several sounds don't quite match. I didn't want to tweak the values until you could hear how close they got with your original values.  I only changed a few of them. I tweaked 06, and changed 18  and 19 completely, and maybe one other i think.  They are all tweakable from where they are to get closer to the originals.   

11. Maybe if possible, allow the OLED display to stay on ONLY when the unit is powered via USB. Or maybe add a parameter for "Display Auto OFF Time".  
This is doable for sure. 

12. When we get around to finalizing this module, I would like to go over all 100 of my sounds and tweak them to take advantage of the added things we might add. While still keeping the idea that they are the Patchman Music EWI4000s bank - only reimagined by Matt Traum for the WindySynth.
YES! This is what i had in mind myself.  

13. Is it possible to get much more gain at the headphone output? I'd like to hear it 2-3 times louder. Yes, I have the volume set to 100.
The "MIX" menu is defaulted at 50% and it shares some of the output volume (maybe not the best way to mix the input in). 100 is only line in, 0 is only Synth.  Plus i have to go through the entire audio chain and analyze the levels to protect from clipping and still drive the output. 
But if this doesn't end up with higher output without clipping, I'll add some gain when i redesign the board. 
I've noticed that the headphone you use make a BIG difference.  I have a set of old apple ear buds (with an actual cord--remember those?) These are pretty loud.  

14 On the Patch display, can we make it show the bank number, patch number, and the text name? The name is so much more useful. 
Yeah, I struggled with how small to make the text. All the text is in there though, so it won't be too much trouble to put the names.  -- v0.0.45 now has names (breaking name at first space)

15. It would be great to get the Formant feature going. I think it is some kind of Comb Filter.
I can put a filter in for this purpose,but i'm not sure what parameters to use yet to match the 4k.  

16. Also, if you can add some user adjustable parameters to the comb filter, it would expand the sound pallet tremendously.

17. Speaking of expanding the possible pallet, it would be extremely powerful to tag on additional parameters such as FM, AM, and Ring Modulation. good ideas!
Some low hanging fruit: The 2 oscillators are really mad of 3 each (tri, Saw, pulse), so 6 in total.  They all actually have "Pulse width" controls (e.g. tri becomes saw and vise versa) which can be modulated. right now only the pulse is being modulated by the control--to emulate the 4k.  The oscillators themselves, are that expensive, so we have a lot of things we can do.  also the range of the lfos are set up right now to mimic the 4k. but if increase the could easily produce FM for example(they are the same objects s the other oscillators). 

once we diverge too far from the 4k, I'd have to cobble together another patch editor tool, though. 

Note: I couldn't figure out what the 4k synth was doing with the oscillator "beat" controls. I know it has something to do with two oscillators beating against each other differently for different notes--but I couldn't figure out how to mimic whatever the 4k was doing.  
So, these controls in the editor are free to use for another parameter :)

18. Maybe a bug? If I click and hold down the knob and turn while holding the display flashes very quickly.
Yeah, that is the special "spastic GUI mode." :)  (I forgot to handle that case--dho!)

19. Patch 069 is pretty different? The noise seems to have an incorrect envelope timing?
20. Envelope timing seem wrong in Patch 088
Yeah, I noticed a couple of patches that are WAY off from the 4k. I'll look into what is going on.

21. It would be nice to have MIDI IN and MIDI OUT 5 pin DIN at some point.
Right. When I re-spin the board I'll put these in.  

22. In the future would it be possible to _easily_ add editing of all parameters via the user interface in the synth? In other words, any time you add functions, the list could easily be updated to be able to access the parameter and knob through the values? I know this would be fairly tedious but to have that ability at a gig just to tweak things would be great. Also we never know how long it will be practical to use the very old Vyzex editor going forward. Maybe you can come up with a clever way to number every parameter so as to make it easy to arrange the order of the parameters when scrolling through them to select them.

I think if I added a couple of buttons to quick jump between menus, this might be possible.  

Friday, September 27, 2024

23. Regarding real world legato time in response to MIDI CC#5...
    This is one of those things that every synth seems to handle differently.
    In other words, how fast should a synth actually slide for any given value of MIDI CC#5.
    Since there does not seem to be a standard for this, 
    I would suggest that you calibrate glide time response in the WindySynth to match the timing of the ever popular VL70-m.
I wondered about that when i put the portamento in there.  I like the VL70-m as a reference (then they'd match)

Fantastic job on this so far!! Wow!!
Thanks! 

Matt Traum
PATCHMAN MUSIC, LLC
9535 Greystone Parkway
Brecksville, OH 44141-2939
